[Merged by Bors] - Add demo kafka-druid-water-level-data (#76)
stackabletech/stackablectl: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/demos/kafka-druid-water-level-data.adoc

In case the product is not ready yet a warning might be shown.
====

== Inspect data in Kafka
Kafka is used as an event streaming platform to stream the data in near real-time.
All the messages put in and read from Kafka are structured in dedicated queues called topics.
The test data is split across two topic called `stations` and `measurements`.
The topic `stations` contains a record for every station that can measure the water level.
The topic `measurements` contains a record for every measurement that has happened.
The records get produced (put in) by the data ingestion job and are consumed (read) by Druid afterwards in the same order they where produced.

As Kafka itself has no webinterface you have to use a Kafka client like https://docs.confluent.io/platform/current/app-development/kafkacat-usage.html[kafkacat].
In order to connect to Kafka, use the `kafka` endpoint from the `kafka` service in your `stackablectl services list` command output (`172.18.0.3:32536` in this case).

=== List available topics
If you have `kafkacat` installed, you can see the available brokers and topics with the following command.

> If not, that's no big deal as you would see nearly the exact same output.

Author: Changed to `If not, that's no big deal, as you would see nearly the exact same output if you would be able execute the commands.`
Is that more clear?

> If not, that's no big deal as you would see nearly the exact same output.

Author: Ok maybe we should just remove the sentence.
I want to say "If you don't have kcat install thats fine. There is no additional benefit in running this commands as they would produce the exact same output as the commands in this docs do. You can simply look at the responses here in this document. But trust me, you would get the same results"

> If not, that's no big deal as you would see nearly the exact same output.

Author: Removed the sentence. Is that ok for you?

> If not, that's no big deal as you would see nearly the exact same output.

Reviewer: Yeah i think thats better :)

  "value": 220,
  "station_uuid": "47174d8f-1b8e-4599-8a59-b580dd55bc87"
}
{
  "timestamp": 1658153700000,
  "value": 220,
  "station_uuid": "47174d8f-1b8e-4599-8a59-b580dd55bc87"
}
----

The records from the two topics only contain the needed data.
The measurement contain a refer to the station.
The relationship is illustrated below.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/topics.png[]

The reason for splitting the data up into two different topics is the improved performance.
One simpler solution would be to use a single topic and produce records that look like the following:

[source,json]
{
  "uuid": "47174d8f-1b8e-4599-8a59-b580dd55bc87",
  "number": 48900237,
  "shortname": "EITZE",
  "longname": "EITZE",
  "km": 9.56,
  "agency": "VERDEN",
  "longitude": 9.2767694354,
  "latitude": 52.9040654474,
  "water": {
    "shortname": "ALLER",
    "longname": "ALLER"
  },
  "timestamp": 1658151900000,
  "value": 221
}
----

Notice the two last attributes that differ from the previously shown `stations` records.
The obvious downside of this is, that every measurement (there are multiple millions of it) has to contain all the data known about the station that it was measured at.

> This can lead to transmitting and storing the information of e.g. the longitude of a station multiple thousand times.

Author: Changed to `This leads to transmitting and storing duplicated information of e.g. the longitude of a station many times, resulting in increased network traffic and storage usage.`

If you are interested on how many records have been produced to the Kafka topic so far, use the following command.
It will print the last record produced to the topic, which will be formatted with the pattern specified in the `-f` parameter.
The given pattern will print some metadata of the record.

[source,console]
----
$ kafkacat -b 172.18.0.3:32536 -C -t stations -o -1 -c 1 \
    -f 'Topic %t / Partition %p / Offset: %o / Timestamp: %T\n'
Topic stations / Partition 0 / Offset: 688 / Timestamp: 1660829626969
----

`688` stations have been fetched and put into Kafka.
This demo does not live-stream new stations into the topic, instead it is a one-time bulk ingestion job.
New stations should be pretty rare.
Druid ingests the topic near-realtime regardless.
So if you would produce new `stations` records they will shop up in Druid and are available for your analysis.

[source,console]
----
$ kafkacat -b 172.18.0.3:32536 -C -t measurements -o -1 -c 1 \
    -f 'Topic %t / Partition %p / Offset: %o / Timestamp: %T\n'
Topic measurements / Partition 0 / Offset: 7586541 / Timestamp: 1660831499070
----

> From the output you can see, that the last measurement record was produced at the timestamp `1660831499070` which translates to `Do 18. Aug 16:04:59 CEST 2022` (using the command `date -d @1660831499`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output shows that the last measurement record was produced at the timestamp `1660831499070` which translates to `Do 18. Aug 16:04:59 CEST 2022` (using the command `date -d @1660831499`).
```

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/druid_1.png[]

By clicking on `Ingestion` at the top you can see the running ingestion jobs.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/druid_2.png[]

After clicking on the magnification glass to the right side of the `RUNNING` supervisor you can see additional information (here the supervisor `measurements` was chosen).
On the tab `Statistics` on the left you can see the number of processed records as well as the number of errors.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/druid_3.png[]

The statistics show that Druid is currently ingesting `3597` records/s and has ingested ~10 million records so far.
All records have been ingested successfully, which is indicated by having no `processWithError`, `thrownAway` or `unparseable` records.

=== Query the data source
The started ingestion jobs have automatically created the Druid data sources `stations` and `measurements`.
You can see the available data sources by clicking on `Datasources` at the top.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/druid_4.png[]

> The `Avg. row size (bytes)` shows, that a typical `measurement` record has is `4` bytes large, while a `station` record has `213` bytes, which is more than 50 times the size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Avg. row size (bytes)` shows, that a typical `measurement` record has `4` bytes, while a `station` record has `213` bytes, which is more than 50 times the size.
```

> So with choosing two dedicated topics over a single topic the demo was able to save 50x of storage and compute costs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So with choosing two dedicated topics over a single topic, this demo was able to save 50x of storage and computation costs.
```

> By clicking on the `measurements` datasource you can see the segments the datasource consists of.
> In this case the `measurements` datasource is partitioned by the day of the measurement, resulting in 33 segments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By clicking on the `measurements` data source you can see the segments of which the data source consists of.
In this case the `measurements` data source is partitioned by the day of the measurement, resulting in 33 segments.
```

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/druid_5.png[]

Druid offers a web-based way of querying the datasources via SQL.
To achieve this you first have to click on `Query` at the top.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/druid_6.png[]

You can now enter any arbitrary SQL statement, to e.g. list 10 stations run

[source,sql]
----
select * from stations limit 10
----

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/druid_7.png[]

To count the measurements per day run

[source,sql]
----
select
  time_format(__time, 'YYYY/MM/dd') as "day",
  count(*) as measurements
from measurements
group by 1
order by 1 desc
----

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/druid_8.png[]

== Superset
Superset provides the ability to execute SQL queries and build dashboards.
Open the `superset` endpoint `external-superset` in your browser (http://172.18.0.4:32251 in this case).

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_1.png[]

> Log in with the credentials username `admin`, password `admin`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log in with the username `admin` and password `admin`.
```

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_2.png[]

=== View dashboard
The demo has created a Dashboard to visualize the water level data.
To open it click on the tab `Dashboards` at the top.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_3.png[]

Click on the dashboard called `Water level data`.
It might take some time until the dashboards renders all the included charts.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_4.png[]

=== View charts

The dashboard `Water level data` consists of multiple charts.
To list the charts click on the tab `Charts` at the top.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_5.png[]

Click on the Chart `Measurements / hour`.
On the left side you can modify the chart and click on `Run` to see the effect.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_6.png[]

You can see that starting from `2022/08/12` some stations didn't measure or transmit their data.
They started sending measurements again at `2022/08/14`.

> === View station distribution on world map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== View the station distribution on the world map
```

To look at the geographical distribution of the stations you have to click on the tab `Charts` at the top again.
Afterwards click on the chart `Stations distribution`.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_7.png[]

> The stations are of course placed alongside of open waters.

Reviewer: Open waters refers to oceans or seas.
```suggestion
The stations are of course placed alongside of waters.
```

> They are colored by the water they measure, so all stations of a water have the same color.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are colored by the waters they measure, so all stations alongside a body of water have the same color.
```

You can move and zoom the map with your mouse to interactively explore the map.
You can e.g. have a detailed look at the water https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhine[Rhein].

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_8.png[]

=== Execute arbitrary SQL statements
Within Superset you can not only create dashboards but also run arbitrary SQL statements.
On the top click on the tab `SQL Lab` -> `SQL Editor`.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_9.png[]

On the left select the database `druid`, the schema `druid` and set `See table schema` to `stations` or `measurements`.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_10.png[]

On the right textbox enter the desired SQL statement.
We need to join the two tables to get interesting results.
To find out the number of measurements the stations made run the following query:

[source,sql]
----
select
  stations.longname as station,
  count(*) as measurements
from measurements inner join stations on stations.uuid = measurements.station_uuid
group by 1
order by 2 desc
----

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_11.png[]

> You can also find out the number of measurements for every water:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also find out the number of measurements for every body of water:
```

[source,sql]
----
select
  stations.water_longname as water,
  count(*) as measurements
from measurements inner join stations on stations.uuid = measurements.station_uuid
group by 1
order by 2 desc
----

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_12.png[]

> What might also be interesting is the average and current measurement of the stations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What might also be interesting is the average and current amount of measurement of the stations:
```

Author: It shows whatever the last measurement was. Like how many meters the water level is. This column does not show the amount/number of measurements

Reviewer: Ok got it wrong then.

[source,sql]
----
select
  stations.longname as station,
  avg("value") as avg_measurement,
  latest("value") as current_measurement,
  latest("value") - avg("value") as diff
from measurements inner join stations on stations.uuid = measurements.station_uuid
group by 1
order by 2 desc
----

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/superset_13.png[]

== MinIO
The S3 provided by MinIO is used as a persistent deep storage for Druid to store all the data used.

> Open the `minio` endpoint `console-http` in your browser (http://172.18.0.5:32595 in this case).

Reviewer: Does it make sense to repeat? With all the images and text the last list for the services is far on top.
```suggestion
Open the `minio` endpoint `console-http` retrieved by `stackablectl services list` in your browser (http://172.18.0.5:32595 in this case).
```

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/minio_1.png[]

> Log in with the credentials username `root`, password `rootroot`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log in with the username `root` and password `rootroot`.
```

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/minio_2.png[]

Click on the blue button `Browse` on the bucket `druid` and open the folders `data`.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/minio_3.png[]

> You can see the druid has created a folder for both of the two datasources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see the druid has created a folder for both data sources.
```

Go ahead and open the folder `measurements`.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/minio_4.png[]

As you can see druid saved 35MB of data within 33 prefixes (folders).

> One prefix corresponds to on segment which in turn contains all the measurements of a day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One prefix corresponds to one segment which in turn contains all the measurements of a day.
```

> If you don't see any folders or files, the reason is that Druid has not saved it's data from memory to the deep storage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't see any folders or files, the reason is that Druid has not saved its data from memory to the deep storage yet.
```

After waiting for a few minutes the data should have been flushed to S3 and show up.

image::demo-kafka-druid-water-level-data/minio_5.png[]

If you open up a prefix for a specific day you can see that Druid has placed a file containing the data of that day there.

== Summary
The demo put station records into the Kafka stream pipeline topic `station`.
It also streamed ~3500 measurements/s for a total of ~11 million measurements into the topic `measurements`.

> Druid ingested the data near real-time into its datasource and enabled SQL access to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Druid ingested the data near real-time into its data source and enabled SQL access to it.
```
